---
title: Inferring the presence of metabolites
---

We seek to infer the presence or absence of $M$ metabolites in $S$
species. We denote by $x_{sm}$ whether metabolite $m=1,\ldots,M$ is
present ($x_{sm}=1$) or absent ($x_{sm}=0$) in species $s=1,\ldots,S$.
To infer the full vector
$\boldsymbol{x}=(x_{11}, \ldots, x_{1M},\ldots,x_{SM})$, we assume that
related species share a similar set of metabolites and that metabolites
related in their synthesis share a similar distribution across species.
Let $\mathbb{P}(x_{sm}=1|y_{sm})=y_{sm}$ be the probability with which
metabolite $m$ is present in species $s$. We then assume that

$$\mathop{\mathrm{logit}}y_{sm} = \mu_m + \epsilon_{sm}$$

where $\mu$ is a metabolite-specific intercept and $\epsilon_{sm}$ is
normally distributed with mean 0 and co-variance
$\mathop{\mathrm{cov}}(\epsilon_{sm},\epsilon_{s'm'})=\alpha \sigma_{ss'} + \beta \sigma_{mm'}$
between each combination of species and metabolite. Here, $\sigma_{ss'}$
and $\sigma_{mm'}$ are known measures of covariance between species $s$
and $s'$ and between metabolites $m$ and $m'$, respectively, and
$\alpha$ and $\beta$ are positive scalars.

We consider two sets of data informative about $\boldsymbol{x}$: i)
Presence-absence data obtained with mass-spectrometry and ii)
presence-only reports of specific metabolites in specific specie. Let
$\boldsymbol{d}_{sj}=(d_{sj1}, \ldots, d_{sjM})$ be the presence-absence
vector of each metabolite $m$ obtained with mass-spectrometry run
$j=1,\ldots,J_s$ performed on species $s$. Assuming a false-positive and
false-negative error rates $\epsilon_{01}$ and $\epsilon_{10}$,
respectively, we have

$$\mathbb{P}(\boldsymbol{d}_{sj}|\boldsymbol{x}, \epsilon_{01}, \epsilon_{10}) = \prod_m \left[ x_{sm}\left(\epsilon_{10}^{1-d_{sjm}}(1-\epsilon_{10})^{d_{sjm}}\right) + (1-x_{sm})\left( \epsilon_{01}^{d_{sjm}}(1-\epsilon_{01})^{1-d_{sjm}}\right)\right].$$

To model the presence only data, it must be put in relation to the
expected research effort. Let $p_{sm}$ denote the known number of
presence-only reports for metabolite $m$ in species $s$ and $n_{sm}$ the
unknown number of research projects that aimed at discovering metabolite
$m$ in species $s$. Assuming a false-positive and false-negative error
rates $\pi_{01}$ and $\pi_{10}$, respectively, we have

$$\mathbb{P}(p_{sm}|n_{sm}, \pi_{01}, \pi_{10}) =$$

We would have the covariance matrix such as :
$$\mathop{\mathrm{cov}}(\epsilon_{smt}, \epsilon_{s'm't'}) = \alpha \sigma_{ss'}^P + \beta \sigma_{mm'}^M + \gamma \sigma_{ss'}^E + \ldots$$

With $P$ the phenotype between two species, $E$ an environment factor
between two species and $M$ the TODO
